This 2021 convention is being broadcast in 240 lands.
We anticipate over 14 million individuals
will be able to enjoy the program by this means.
Your generous donations make this possible.
Donations can be made online at donate.jw.org.
In the past, Jehovah performed miracles that strengthened the faith of his servants.
Is he performing miracles in our day?
Let's listen as Brother David's plane of the governing body provides the answer.
In the talk, Jehovah's powerful works inspire faith.
Jehovah is a miracle worker.
What's a miracle?
How would you describe it?
Well, let's give a simple definition.
A miracle is a powerful work that can't be explained in human terms.
Whenever Jehovah performs a miracle, he has a purpose.
One reason might be to strengthen the faith of his servants.
And as the title of this talk, Jehovah's powerful works inspire faith.
Well, we love to consider the miracles recorded in the Bible.
It's really faith-strengthening, isn't it?
So during this talk, we're going to consider just a few.
How about this one?
Jehovah leads the Israelites out of Egypt.
They arrive at the Red Sea, and it seems they're trapped.
The seas ahead of them, Pharaoh and his armies are behind.
But Jehovah causes the waters of the Red Sea to part,
and the Israelites cross over on dry land.
When Pharaoh and his armies follow,
Jehovah brings the sea back to its normal condition
and the cream of the crop of Egyptian manhood drowns.
Now we know what effect that miracle had on the Egyptians,
but what effect they did have on the Israelites.
Let's see Exodus chapter 14 and verse 31.
I'll give you a moment so you can find that.
Exodus chapter 14 and verse 31.
It says, Israel also saw the great power
that Jehovah wielded against the Egyptians,
and the people began to fear Jehovah and to put faith in Jehovah.
So that miracle inspired faith in the Israelites.
Now they were the only ones who were impressed by that miracle.
Let's fast forward 40 years.
Two spies entered Jericho and go to the house of rehab,
the prostitute, and she says to them,
we heard how Jehovah dried up the waters of the Red Sea.
When we heard about it, we lost heart.
For Jehovah, your God is God in the heavens above,
and earth and the earth beneath.
Just hearing about that miracle inspired faith in rehab.
Now another person whose faith was strengthened
by a powerful work might surprise you.
A queen of Shiba.
Well, the queen of Shiba, what was the powerful work?
Outstanding wisdom.
She'd heard about the wisdom of Solomon,
and her curiosity got the better of her.
She just had to see if the report was true.
And that involved a 1200 mile trip from her country to Jerusalem.
The trip turned out to be well worth the effort.
At the end of the visit, the queen of Shiba sent to Solomon,
made Jehovah your God be praised who has taken pleasure in you
by putting you on the throne of Israel.
She gave credit to Jehovah for what she saw.
Now we don't know if she ever became a worshiper of Jehovah,
but Jesus said that she'd rise up in the judgment
and condemn those Jews who wouldn't even cross the street
to listen to the Son of God.
Well, those who just two examples,
and as you know, there are many more in the Bible.
The Apostle Paul lists some of them at Hebrews chapter 11,
and we're going to read verses 32 to 34.
Hebrews chapter 11, I'll give you a moment,
verses 32 to 34, and I'm going to read verse 32 first.
Hebrews 11, 32 to God it.
And what more will I say?
For time will fail me if I go on to read aid about Gideon,
Beirack, Samson, Jeff the David, as well as Samuel,
and the other prophets.
Now, as I read verses 33 and 34,
I want you children to look at the events that are being described
and see if you can guess who was involved,
who was the object of this miracle.
So let's read verse 33.
It says, through faith,
they defended kingdoms,
brought about righteousness,
obtained promises,
stopped the mouths of lions,
quenched the force of fire,
escaped the edge of the sword.
From a weak state were made powerful,
became mighty in war,
routed invading armies.
Now let's go back,
and see if we can identify individuals
who were involved in those miracles.
How about defeated kingdoms?
Did you come up with someone?
Let's talk about Gideon.
Now we like Gideon.
He reminds us of us.
He wasn't exactly brimming with confidence.
When an angel approached him and indicated
that Jehovah had worked for him to do,
Gideon said,
My clan is the least emanasa,
and I am the most insignificant in my father's house.
He said something else,
something that has a bearing on the theme of our discussion.
He said to the angel,
If Jehovah is with us,
where are all his wonderful acts
that our father's related to us?
Yes, where were the powerful works?
Before he was going to stick his neck out,
Gideon wanted some kind of reassurance
that he had Jehovah's blessing.
What to do?
What was the angel going to do?
He performed a powerful work,
and that inspired faith in Gideon.
Later, Gideon's confidence was through
their boosted by three other remarkable signs,
through involving a fleece
and another involving a God-given dream.
Now, with those powerful works in mind
and with Jehovah's help,
Gideon did the impossible.
With 300 men,
he defeated an army of 135,000.
Now, what's the take away?
What's the lesson for us?
With Jehovah on our side,
we are never outnumbered.
Let's go back to verse 33.
Now, you children,
I'm sure you're going to get this next one,
verse 33,
stopped the mouths of lions.
Who did that?
Well, it was the same one who helped Gideon
defeat the Midianites.
It was Jehovah,
but what was the circumstance?
Well, you know,
it was when Daniel was thrown into the lion's pit.
Now, when Daniel was condemned to die,
he didn't know for sure that Jehovah was going to rescue him,
but he knew that Jehovah would do the right thing.
He could have that confidence
because Jehovah had been with him throughout his life.
Daniel had been condemned to die once before.
No, wait a minute, let's think about that.
When was that?
Well, it was when the king of Babylon had a dream,
and he decreed that unless Daniel and the other wise men of Babylon
could tell him what he dreamed
and then relate the meaning of the dream,
they would all be put to death.
That called for a powerful work.
Jehovah provided Daniel with the information he needed,
and Daniel's life was saved.
Well, that was Babylon.
Now we're in Persia,
and Daniel is once more facing death.
Death by lion.
And once again, Jehovah comes to the rescue.
He temporarily shuts the mouths of those lions.
Well, we're going to imagine what effect that had on Daniel,
but what about us today?
What's the takeaway?
What's the lesson?
Today, Satan is walking about
like a roaring lion seeking to devour someone.
We may never know how often Jehovah shuts the mouth
of that lion, how often Jehovah protects his people
as a group from Satan.
When we're working from door to door, for example,
it's dangerous out there.
And we probably have no idea how busy the angels are
in our behalf.
And if someone does lose his life
while in Jehovah's service or at a meeting,
and it has happened,
his loved ones can be sure of two things.
First of all,
their loved ones did not lose Jehovah's approval.
And second,
the loss is only temporary.
Satan can never do us any lasting harm.
And one day, Jehovah will shut that lion's mouth permanently.
Now, back to Hebrews 11.
And this time, we're reading verse 34.
And I'm sure your kids are going to guess this one.
Verse 34,
quenched the force of fire.
Of course,
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego.
There were court officials in Babylon,
and you'll recall that one day,
King Nebuchadnezzar made a huge image of gold
and demanded that everybody worship it.
Anyone who refused would be thrown into the burning fiery furnace.
Well, that was a time to remember
Jehovah's power for works of the past.
And the three men had experienced that,
probably when they were just teenagers.
Can you think of how?
When they arrived in Babylon,
they were taken to the palace for a special training,
and they were told to eat whatever was put in front of them.
In this case, some of the food was prohibited under the Mosaic law.
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego refused to eat those foods,
and they asked to be given vegetables and water instead.
Now, for some of you children,
just the thought of having to eat vegetables all the time
is probably quite a test.
But now, think of the results of this diet.
After only 10 days,
the three young men were in much better health
than those who had followed the King's diet.
Now, if you've ever had to follow a diet,
you know that there's no way that you can show improvement
in just 10 days.
Jehovah had to have been involved.
Now, they were facing death.
They knew their God.
They knew what he was capable of.
They told the King that if it was the will of God,
they wouldn't be rescued.
But if not, they still wouldn't worship the image of gold.
They knew that if Jehovah chose not to intervene miraculously,
it was not a sign of his disapproval.
Well, you know what happened.
They were thrown into the fiery furnace.
But God sent his angel to protect them.
And when they stepped out of the furnace,
there wasn't even the smell of fire on them.
Their integrity also resulted in a great witness.
When the King saw that they were alive and well,
he praised Jehovah.
He said, Praise be the God of Shadrach,
Meshach and Abednego.
There is no other God who was able to rescue.
Like this one.
What a witness that does.
Well, that's what happened back then.
What's the takeaway?
What's the lesson?
Today, many brothers are facing the heat of adversity.
Russia, for example.
Well, many brothers have been given long prison sentences
because they won't bow down to the state.
Now, Jehovah doesn't prevent this from happening.
Any more than he prevented Shadrach,
Meshach and Abednego from being thrown into the furnace.
But he does help them.
What do we notice about them as they're being led off the prison?
They're smiling.
They're serene.
They're at peace.
They know their God.
And when they come out,
there won't even be the smell of fire on them.
Their faith will be intact.
Their fine conduct also results in a good witness
to the jailers and others who hear about the first execution.
Well, we'll take one more example in verse 34.
Escaped the edge of the sword.
I was thinking of Elisha.
Now, in the days of the prophet Elisha,
the king of Syria went to war against Israel,
and he called a war council,
and the Syrian sequently planned this strategy.
But Jehovah kept telling Elisha
what the Syrians were up to,
and Elisha kept telling the king of Israel.
The Syrians were furious,
and the king said a large army to capture Elisha.
What in gratitude?
Why do we say that?
Because in the previous chapter,
we read that Elisha had cured the leprosy of Naaman,
a chief of the Syrian army,
and now a large Syrian army was hunting Elisha down.
We hope Naaman wasn't among them.
Finally, the Syrians found the city where Elisha was,
and they surrounded it.
Elisha's attendant was scared to death,
but Elisha wasn't afraid.
2 Kings chapter 6 verses 16 and 17 explains why.
This is encouraging.
Face strengthening.
Let's look it up.
2 Kings chapter 6 verses 16 and 17.
Now this is Elisha talking to his attendant.
Do not be afraid.
For there are more who are with us than those who are with them.
Then Elisha began to pray and say,
O Jehovah, open his eyes.
Please, that he may see.
Immediately, Jehovah opened the attendant's eyes,
and he saw,
and look, the mountainous region was full of horses
and chariots of fire all around Elisha.
Well, that was a miraculous occurrence
that was faith strengthening indeed.
What's the takeaway?
What's the lesson for us?
Well, one day, we'll be faced with hosts of modern day Syrians,
and what's going to help us to remain calm, unafraid?
We'll look heavenward,
and with our eyes of faith, we'll see myriads of angels
and count all around us.
We know that Jehovah will do the right thing,
whatever is in harmony with his will.
I hear you say,
I'd like to see a miracle that'd help a lot to strengthen my faith.
We see miracles every day.
What's a miracle?
It's a powerful work that can't be explained in human terms.
A modern example of that is prayer.
Isn't prayer amazing?
Can you explain it?
Jehovah can listen to millions of prayers in any language all at once.
That's a miracle.
But how does prayer build our faith?
When we pray about a problem that nobody but Jehovah knows about,
and our prayer is answered,
our faith is strengthened.
Now that is powerful.
And what about all the experiences we hear where someone desperately prayed to God
if you exist, please send someone to teach me about you.
And 10 minutes later, a witness knocks on the door.
Coincidence or miracle?
Another miracle, our Christian brotherhood.
Isn't it remarkable?
Who can explain it?
Former enemies become fast friends.
You can go to a kingdom hall anywhere in the world,
and you'll find your brothers and sisters.
They'll be glad to see you.
You'll feel at ease.
You know what they believe and what they'll be studying at the meetings.
You'll see and feel the love.
In times of ethnic cleansing,
how often do we read of brothers and sisters who risk their lives
to hide fellow believers who happen to be from another tribe?
You know, when I think of a loving brotherhood,
I always think of the experience Jack Johansson related in his life story.
Brother Johansson was a missionary serving in Malawi.
At a time when the country was experienced in a tremendous political unrest and violence.
Now he and a young African brother set out to check on the welfare of witnesses
in another part of the country.
And along the way, they encountered a soldier who wasn't friendly.
He said to the African brother,
I have to shoot the white man.
He was serious.
As he raised his gun to fire,
the young African brother thrust himself between the gunman and brother Johansson
and said, shoot me, shoot me instead.
Well, that soldier was so touched by the love of our young African brother
that he put his gun down.
When you hear experiences like that,
it makes you proud to be part of Jehovah's organization.
And why is it that Jehovah is gathering us into an organization?
There's an interesting detail recorded at Isaiah 43 and verse 10.
I'd like you to look it up.
Now, when you hear Isaiah 43, 10, you say, I know that.
It's about you who are my witnesses, says Jehovah.
And that's true, but we're going to focus on another part of the verse.
So Isaiah 43 and verse 10,
you are my witnesses, declares Jehovah.
Yes, my servant whom I have chosen, now notice this,
so that you may know and have faith in me.
Before we can have faith in Jehovah,
we have to get to know Him.
We have to learn about His powerful works,
those past and those present.
And as we study His dealings with His people in the past,
we see that Jehovah always keeps His promises.
He's promised to bring about a righteous new world,
and we can take that promise to the bank.
And through prayer and association with His organization,
we can experience the modern day miracles that Jehovah is performing.
The more we know about Jehovah, the more we'll love Him.
The more we love Him, the more we'll want to tell others about Him.
The more we preach, the stronger our faith will become.
And we will be made powerful by faith.
Thank you, brother, explain for that thrilling review
of Jehovah's powerful works.
In the Bible, we read of those who showed faith
while their contemporaries did not.
Why the difference?
What can we learn from those who showed faith?
Take note of the lessons in the upcoming five-part symposium.
Each speaker will introduce the one to follow.
Brother William Turner, a helper to the service committee,
will deliver the first talk entitled,
imitate the faithful, not the faithless, able, not came.
As humans, we are designed with the ability to imitate
what we see and hear.
For example, we learn to talk by imitating the language
and accent of our parents.
And as we grew up, we probably also adopted the attitudes
and actions of people we associated with.
Clearly, the example of others can have a powerful influence on us.
Today, more than ever, we need to copy good examples of faith.
Why?
Because we are living in a time when our faith will be tested
in many ways, but not what we will have to do.
I invite you, please, to turn with me to the book of Jude.
And follow along as we read verse 20 in the book of Jude.
It says, but you beloved ones, build yourselves up
on your most holy faith and pray with Holy Spirit.
And I help understand this first.
Think of what a homeowner might do if he knows a really bad storm is approaching.
Likely, he will take steps to build up or strengthen his home,
from repairing cracks in the foundation,
to reinforcing the doors, walls, and windows.
Well, in a similar manner, you and I must take steps to build up
or strengthen our faith so that we can protect ourselves
against the onslaught of tests and trials we are likely to face.
You know, as Jude said, we must continue building ourselves up
on our most holy faith, which are the Christian teachings found in God's Word.
And as we study God's Word and pray for his help,
we can gain strength by learning from the example set
by different Bible characters.
There is so much that can be learned from the examples of those in ancient times.
Each talk of this symposium will highlight ways in which we can imitate
the faith of Jehovah's loyal servants of the past
and reject the course of faithless ones.
Let's start by examining the example of Abel.
He was one of the first humans, the fourth, in fact, to exist on earth.
The Bible describes Abel as a righteous man.
He built up a record of living according to Jehovah's standards.
But his family, however, did not.
We're well familiar with his parents, Adam and Eve.
They both rebelled against Jehovah.
And as Older Brother Cain, well, he was not a positive role model.
The Bible described Cain as one whose own works were wicked.
So you think about that.
When you look at Adam, Eve, and Cain,
who all displayed a lack of faith in Jehovah,
can you imagine what that family dynamic must have been like for Faithful Abel?
The tension, hostility, resentment, lack of spiritual discussions?
Do you think Abel's faith was tested?
Indeed it was.
And today, our faith may likewise be tested
by the actions of those who choose not to serve Jehovah.
We invite you to watch the following reenactment.
As you do, note how a sister's faith is tested.
I arrived in a new city during the rainy season.
It rained all day every day for a whole month.
At that time, there were only three publishers there.
The first sister I met was my new pioneer partner.
At first, I felt as if the people in this territory spoke a different language.
When I tried to talk to some people about the Bible,
they did not like it, and some were even afraid of these new ideas.
When government officials noticed that we had shared some tracks with the people,
they began to watch us and followed us for about three months.
I felt overwhelmed by all of this and became very anxious.
I had few return visits or opportunities to speak about Jehovah.
I felt lost.
I didn't know what to do or where to go.
I often wondered, father, why did you send me here?
It was like I had gone from being on a mountain peak
to the bottom of a deep valley.
As our sister adjusted to her new circumstances,
did you know how her trials made her feel?
Anxious, lost, and overwhelmed.
Perhaps you've experienced similar feelings when dealing with tests of your faith.
So how can Abel's example of faith help you and me?
Let's notice what he did.
Turn with me please to the book of Hebrews.
And we're going to read Hebrews chapter 11, verse 4.
There we read,
by faith,
Abel offered God a sacrifice of greater worth than that of Cain.
And through that faith,
he received the witness that he was righteous.
For God approved his gifts.
And although he died,
he still speaks through his faith.
Abel built strong faith in Jehovah
even though those around him failed to do so.
Let's consider three steps that he took.
First, Abel took time to ponder spiritual matters.
For instance,
he no doubt discerned Jehovah's love and wisdom in creation.
As a shepherd,
perhaps he looked at his sheep and recognized that they needed someone to guide and protect them.
And Abel likely discerned as humans,
we too need someone to guide and protect us.
Someone far wiser and more powerful than any human.
Second step.
Abel prayed and acted on what he learned.
Even though his knowledge was limited,
it was enough.
Enough for him to act in faith.
No doubt Abel appealed to Jehovah in prayer to accept his sacrifice.
And Jehovah approved his gift.
Abel demonstrated his faith so powerfully.
Did you know, in verse four,
it tells us that his example still speaks to us today.
At times, we may feel that we don't have enough knowledge
or experience to demonstrate faith like Abel.
But that's okay.
It doesn't have to be an obstacle.
And to Jehovah and make the most of the knowledge that you do have.
Act in faith.
And Jehovah will help you.
The third step.
Abel remained steadfast when under trial.
He didn't let the actions of his family affect his faith.
And we can't let the actions of others affect ours.
We must never allow something that another person says or does
to make us feel ashamed of being one of Jehovah's witnesses.
So be ready.
Be quick to identify yourself as one of Jehovah's witnesses.
It will help to build and fortify your faith.
And we can also learn from the bad example set by King.
At Genesis chapter four, verses six and seven,
Jehovah warns King about his attitude
and he urges him to turn to doing good.
But just like his faithless parents,
King determined he knew what was best for himself.
And his actions led to the murder of his brother.
We may go through situations where due to imperfection,
we don't always use the best judgment.
Or it causes us to develop a negative attitude.
But when the matter is brought to our attention,
how will we respond?
You see, let's not imitate the faithless example of Cain.
Let's not feel that we always know what's best.
But let's see that warning as a loving tap on the shoulder
from our Heavenly Father.
And allow it to readjust our thinking so that we can build our faith
and preserve our relationship with Him.
Well, let's now go back to our sister.
In the following reenactment, note how she imitates Abel's faith.
I studied the Bible to see how Jehovah cared for his servants in the past.
For example, I read how Jehovah told Jacob throughout his life,
I will be with you wherever you go.
I pictured Jehovah telling me the same thing.
Don't worry, just go.
And I will always be there to help you.
I begged him to help me to be balanced, to feel peace,
and to have courage to go out in the ministry.
One day, Jehovah helped me to find a very good Bible student.
It was an absolutely wonderful and unexpected gift from Jehovah.
Our small group joins congregation meetings through the Internet.
This arrangement is a valuable source of spiritual food for me.
We get together for meals and association as well.
The experiences on JW Broadcasting make me feel that I am not alone.
And I always smile and wake by at the end.
It's wonderful to be here.
Did you notice how our sister built up her faith in Jehovah?
She imitated Abel's example and she followed those steps.
The first step, she pondered on spiritual matters.
She studied the Bible to see how Jehovah cared for his servants in the past.
And then she applied what she learned to her situation.
Then the second step, she prayed and acted on what she learned.
Her prayer was that Jehovah helped her to be balanced, to feel peace,
and to have courage to go into the ministry.
And then she acted in faith.
And despite the challenges in the ministry, she took the third step.
She remained steadfast under trial.
She persevered and was blessed with a study.
And then she reinforced her faith by joining in congregation meetings
and benefiting from the wholesome association of the Brotherhood.
And what was the result?
Jehovah blessed her efforts.
And if you and I follow these steps, he will bless our efforts as well.
By utilizing this tremendous gift, Jehovah has given us
the power of example.
You and I can imitate Abel.
And as we build and fortify our faith,
we will weather any storm of adversity that comes our way.
For the Gary Bro, a helper to the service committee,
will now present the next talk of this symposium.
Imitate the faithful, not the faithless, enoch, not lamek.
Without warning, our faith could suddenly be tested
by how we react in a violent encounter.
Yes, our faith may be tested as enoch's was.
Ungodliness and violence were commonplace before the flood,
and the scriptures clearly indicate how people reacted.
We are told that the faithful man, enoch, chose to walk with God.
So when he was threatened, he looked to Jehovah for security.
On the other hand, lamek, a descendant of the murderer Cain,
opted to provide his own security.
This led to killing a man in supposed self-defense.
Now, enoch and the killer lamek both lived in a violent world,
but their violence reaction plans were totally different.
As we descend deeper into the last days,
people will become more desperate and violence will only escalate.
In the following dramatization,
let's see how reacting to violence could suddenly become
a personal test of faith in Jehovah.
My son barely escaped the gangs.
Again, we're the only ones without a gun
want to keep a gun for protection.
But how else can I protect my family?
In today's violent society, even in the perceived safest of neighborhoods,
we could have a similar experience.
If so, how can we imitate enoch's faith?
For one thing, he recognized a simple but fundamental truth,
Jehovah hates violence.
So for us to walk with God as enoch did,
we must reject violence as an option.
What can help us to do that?
Don't harbor retaliatory thoughts.
Violence thoughts can lead to violent actions without thinking about the consequences.
Learn to recognize situations that could harm us,
then act to avoid the danger.
That's the council given at Proverbs 22 and verse 3.
The shrewd one sees the danger and conceals himself,
but the inexperience keeps right on going and suffer the consequences.
So we're encouraged to conceal ourselves if we sense danger.
Think ahead, look around, be perceptive,
and avoid situations that may become violent.
Avoid violent entertainment.
Why?
It frequently portrays a violent response when a character's safety is threatened.
All sorts of objects or weapons are depicted as strategies
to kill or overpower the opponents.
While Christians may take reasonable steps to ensure their personal security,
they do so within the framework of Bible principles.
Consider these three scriptures as you make decisions about your family's security needs.
David prayed at Psalm 51-14,
save me from blood guilt.
He never wanted to be guilty of murder.
Preparing a response that includes the use of weapons could result in taking a life.
If a Christian takes reasonable steps to defend himself or his property,
he would do everything in his power to avoid taking a human life and become blood guilty.
In Matthew 2652, Jesus warned that those who draw the sword shall die by the sword.
It's well established that when weapons are displayed,
situations usually escalate with tragic outcomes.
Planning to use a deadly weapon could effectively dismiss Jehovah's spirit from our presence.
To pull away from Jehovah is the last thing we want to do in a dangerous situation.
A third is found at Ecclesiastes 918, where it simply says,
Wisdom is better than weapons.
In other words, being armed cannot match Wisdom.
The prudent course is to trust in Jehovah, not weapons.
God's word wisely teaches us to daily show respect, consideration, and genuine kindness to others.
This approach of pursuing peace will often minimize otherwise potential conflicts.
Isn't it true? Violence struggles often begin with a heated exchange of words.
So calmness can often diffuse anger and deflect violent conflicts.
Here's something else to consider.
The Bible book of Jude says that Enoch prophesied to his opposers.
His means that he was a preacher, being known as a courageous witness of Jehovah,
and showing compassion for those to whom we preach is always our best protection.
How was Enoch rewarded for putting his faith in Jehovah?
Note the answer at Hebrews 11 and verse 5.
By faith, Enoch was transferred so as not to see death,
and he was nowhere to be found because God had transferred him.
Before he was transferred, he received the witness that he had pleased God well.
Enoch was rewarded with the knowledge that he had pleased God well.
In some manner, in a very clear way, he was given assurance of Jehovah's approval.
How comforting to know that if we face dangerous encounters with no good way out,
like Enoch, we too can handle that test of faith in a way that will please God well.
In the following dramatization, note how our brother imitates Enoch's example.
Hebrews 11, verse 1.
Faith is the assured expectation of what is hope for.
I do have faith in God's promises, but if a gun is what I need to protect my family,
won't Jehovah understand?
No, I couldn't do that.
I'm not the first to face a violent world.
Hebrews 11.5.
Received the witness that he had pleased God well.
Enoch lived among extreme violence, but he walked with God.
I can imitate his faith.
Did you notice this brother's violence reaction plan?
His faith in God's promises helped him to look to Jehovah for security instead of a gun.
He realized he was not the first to face a violent world and made the firm decision to imitate the faith of Enoch.
So now, prior to a violent confrontation, what can we do to be sure our reaction plan will be pleasing to Jehovah?
Imitate Enoch in these four ways.
Build our faith and confidence in Jehovah now before we are tested in a violent situation.
Reject violent thoughts.
Don't allow the violent movies or violent video games that are sponsored by the devil to train your children or yourselves on how to react in a violent confrontation.
Reject the idea that you will prepare yourselves with weapons and fearlessly keep preaching as Enoch did.
In this way, even if we find ourselves in a violent situation, our violence reaction plan will allow us to imitate Enoch and please God well.
The John Echron, a helper to the coordinators committee, will now consider the next talk of this symposium, imitate the faithful, not the faithless, Noah, not his neighbors.
Jesus compared our days with the days of Noah.
Jesus would know because he was in heaven and watched the days of Noah go from bad to worse.
Well, how bad were the days of Noah?
Let's look at Genesis chapter 6 and verse 5 for a description.
Consequently, Jehovah saw that man's wickedness was great on the earth and that every inclination of the thoughts of his heart was only bad all the time.
The wickedness on the earth was made worse by wicked angels that abandoned their role in heaven and materialized human bodies to marry women on earth.
These unholy marriages produced sons that were giants called Nephilim.
Now, parents, you imagine what it must have been like for Noah and his wife to raise a family in that ungodly world?
But you don't really need to imagine it, do you?
Just one look around us and we can all see that we live in a world that fits the same description if not worse than the days of Noah.
Just as Noah's faith was tested, your faith will likely be tested too as you raise a family in this ungodly world.
Please, do not allow the pressures at work from relatives or others, make you think the material things are more important than your family's relationship with Jehovah.
You can remain faithful by imitating Noah, not his neighbors.
In the following dramatization, note how a parent's faith is tested.
Another busy day, my daughter is going to preach, I'm off to work and it's family worship night.
Bye, Dad. Have a good day, sweetie.
All right, listen up. I got an announcement for everybody.
What? More required over time?
Okay, that's it. It's all I got. Let's get back to work.
It's extra money, but how can I do it and take care of Regina?
Isn't it family worship night?
Maybe a little later, sweetie.
I wanted to, but I was spent again.
Our brother knew it was family worship night, but extra work, the pressures of life were dragging him down.
His faith was being tested.
Would he imitate Noah or his neighbors?
Noah's neighbors lacked faith. They did not do what was needed to save their families.
Instead, Jesus said they were so distracted by their daily lives, eating and drinking, getting married,
that they took no note until the flood came and took them all away.
In contrast, Noah took note.
Noah acted in faith to save his household.
Look at the beautiful description of Noah's faith in Hebrews chapter 11 and verse 7.
By faith, Noah, after receiving divine warning of things not yet seen, showed godly fear and constructed an ark for the saving of his household.
And through this faith, he condemned the world, and he became an heir of the righteousness that results from faith.
Noah's actions saved his household.
We can be sure it was not always easy for Noah to explain to his sons why they were building an ark and no one else was,
or why building it was more important than anything else they had to do.
His three boys would have seen the Nephilim.
Noah and his wife could hardly have shielded their boys from all the stories that circulated about those giants.
Imagine some of the discussions that Noah and his wife had with their boys.
The materialized wicked angels and their Nephilim sons were men of fame and admired by everyone for their superhuman capabilities.
Even today, people are fascinated with stories and movies of humans with superpowers.
But those wicked angels and their sons the Nephilim were nothing to be admired or imitated.
Noah taught his sons not to admire or copy them.
They had to help their boys see that Jehovah felt hurt by the violence and rebellion in the world.
The boys needed to learn to love Jehovah and imitate him.
And take the time to teach your children to hate what Jehovah hates and to love what Jehovah loves.
Jehovah hates liars, cheaters, bullies, selfishness, and greed.
On the other hand, Jehovah loves honesty, peace, love, sharing, and self-control.
Noah, like any good father, wanted to make sure his family had a comfortable place to live and good food to eat.
Think of the houses that Noah and his sons could have built from themselves.
They certainly had the construction experience. But that was not Noah's focus.
Noah's life had more meaning and purpose than building houses, eating and drinking.
Noah taught by example and kept his focus on saving his household from the coming flood.
He likely had at times when he felt tired or overwhelmed with the sheer size and scope of building an ark.
However, Noah did not allow his day-to-day life to crowd out his service to Jehovah.
He made sure that no matter what else was happening in his life, that the work of building the ark kept moving forward.
Our brother we saw in the video, he was tired and overwhelmed by his work and job.
All of us can identify with how he feels. Life in this system is hard.
We appreciate the hard work and effort that you parents are making to keep a good spiritual routine for your family.
We know how tempting it can be to say, well, we'll study later or we'll pick it up again next week.
See the danger.
Putting off our spiritual routine this week can easily lead to three weeks and then six weeks and then not at all.
Jehovah took care of Noah and his family's material needs.
So you can be confident that Jehovah will take care of you and your family. He will bless you for your obedience.
In the following dramatization, note how our brother imitates Noah's faith.
The world is such a mess. It's everything Jesus said it would be.
She's so good, spiritually minded like her mother was.
Can I expect she'll stay that way on her own?
If it is just like Noah's day, I need to show faith like he did.
Let's do our family worship.
I need to show faith in Jehovah and work hard to save my family.
Did you notice how our brother acted in faith?
Our brother imagined what could happen to his daughter if she lost her spirituality and adopted the lifestyle of the world.
What he saw really scared him. He immediately turned off the TV and joined his daughter for family worship.
Noah knew that building the ark would save his family from the coming flood, but only if they were in the ark with him.
He did not want to see his sons adopt the lifestyle of his neighbors.
Noah did everything he could to make sure that he taught his sons to love Jehovah by his words and his actions.
Parents, by imitating Noah, you can save both yourself and your family.
Brother Seth Hyatt, a helper with the service committee, will now consider the next talk of this symposium, imitate the faithful, not the faithless, Moses, not Pharaoh.
For almost 40 years, Moses enjoyed a life of comfort and privilege as the adopted son of Pharaoh's daughter.
Among the advantages, material prosperity, and advanced education, how might those advantages have affected Moses' outlook?
We gained some insight from an incident that took place when Moses was 80 years of age. It's recorded in Exodus, chapter 5.
There in a conversation with the Pharaoh, the Pharaoh is reported to have said to Moses,
Who is Jehovah that I should obey his voice? I do not know Jehovah at all.
No truer words have ever been spoken. That Pharaoh did not know Jehovah, and as a result had no faith in him. He was faithless. His haughty words, dismissive of Jehovah.
No doubt reflected the Egyptian belief that the Pharaoh was himself a God.
Was Moses' outlook affected in a negative way by that Egyptian culture? No.
We see a refreshing contrast. Moses was a humble man, a man of faith, who at the age of 40 made a decision that reflected the depth of that faith,
and that changed his life forever. Why should you and I be interested in Moses' example of faith?
Because like Moses, we face situations that require choices, decisions that reflect the quality of our faith.
For example, note how an elder faces a test of his faith in the following dramatization.
Danny is going to look after the business while we're away. I only scheduled a few small jobs. I'm sure he can handle it.
It's our sign convention, and I planned as best I could for us to go together. But some things, you just can't see coming.
Hello?
Danny was in a panic. He got trouble calls from my two biggest accounts. It was bad. I can't lose their business.
For just a few minutes, let's consider what the scriptures have to say about Moses' faith and consider four ways that we can imitate him.
Turn please to Hebrews chapter 11. And we're going to begin reading in verse 24. Hebrews 11, 24.
By faith, Moses, when grown up, refused to be called the son of Pharaoh's daughter, choosing to be mistreated with the people of God rather than to have the temporary enjoyment of sin.
So the first thing that Moses did, he rejected the proud selfish thinking of that Egyptian world.
He chose to be mistreated with the Israelites who were slaves rather than to align himself with a culture that dismissed Jehovah.
What prompted that decision? The opening words of verse 24 tell us Moses was a man of faith.
And his faith shaped his decisions, not his culture, not community pressure, his faith. And that's our second point.
Now let's continue reading in verse 26. Because he considered the reproach of the Christ to be riches greater than the treasures of Egypt, for he looked intently toward the payment of the reward.
Moses received an assignment, a commission from Jehovah. And he viewed that commission as more valuable than anything that Egypt had to offer.
He turned his back on the comforts of Egypt and aligned himself with Jehovah and the outworking of Jehovah's purpose.
Our third point. He had clear spiritual vision. He looked intently toward the payment of the reward. Moses could see outside the Egypt box.
And he could see the fulfillment of Jehovah's wonderful promises to Abraham and Abraham's descendants.
The spiritual vision is committed on further in verse 27. By faith, he left Egypt, but not fearing the anger of the king, for he continued steadfast as Seahin, the one who was invisible.
Yes, Moses could see the Pharaoh, but with his clear spiritual vision, he could see Jehovah. Moses had an unbreakable friendship with Jehovah. So can you.
The quality of any friendship can be measured by the quality of communication that characterizes it.
Regular heartfelt prayer and meaningful study of the Bible constitute two-way communication between an individual and Jehovah.
As we get to know Jehovah better and better as our faith strengthens and deepens, then our decisions reflect that faith.
And in our words and actions we give evidence of that faith. And that brings us to the fourth point.
In the opening words of verse 27, by faith, Moses left Egypt. His faith was of such quality that it evidenced in his words and his actions.
True, Moses was a man of action. He left Egypt, but he was also a man who expressed his convictions.
When Moses and the Israelites stood on the shore of the Red Sea with Pharaoh and his armies behind them and the Red Sea in front of them, and seemingly nowhere to go, how did Moses strengthen the people?
Do not be afraid. Stand still and see the salvation of Jehovah. Those words must have strengthened the Israelites.
In a similar way, we can strengthen those around us, whether in the preaching work in our dealings with our family or with others, when our faith is voiced and evidenced in the things that we say and do.
We're a blessing to those around us. Of course, it's important that we stay humble as Moses did, ever receptive to Jehovah's direction and counsel that he provides through his word and his organization.
Now, how about that elder who we met earlier? Let's look in and see how he imitates Moses in making a decision.
Okay, just find the parts and I'll call you back. This will take our weekend.
You want us to go? Will you get the program later?
Yeah, and I'll have to text John that I can't be an attendant. But what will I miss that I can't get later?
In Hebrews 11 verse 26 it says,
Moses considered the reproach of the Christ to be riches greater than the treasures of Egypt, for he looked intently toward the payment of the reward.
Of what value is being a prince of Egypt compared with me?
Honey, what do you think?
Nanny? Yeah, here's what I want you to do for now, and we'll pick up the pieces when I get back.
Did you notice how the elder made a decision based on his faith?
With his eyes of faith, he could see the blessings that he and his family would enjoy if they attended the convention together.
And he made a decision as a spiritual man.
In a similar way, if we imitate Moses rejecting the proud selfish thinking of the world and allowing our decisions to be shaped by our faith,
not by culture or community pressure, if we maintain clear spiritual vision and if our faith is evidenced in our words and actions,
then we can be confident of Jehovah's support and his hand of salvation in our behalf just as he did for Moses.
Brother Robert Soranco, a helper to the writing committee, will consider the final talk of this symposium.
imitate the faithful, not the faithless. Jesus disciples, not the Pharisees.
Jesus called them serpents, offspring of vipers.
Who is he talking about? The Pharisees. And who were they?
A prominent Jewish religious sect in the first century.
Why was Jesus so critical of them?
Because even though those religious leaders had knowledge of God and prided themselves in their strict adherence to the law of Moses,
they did not do as Moses had said to listen to the future Savior that Jehovah would raise up for his people.
That Savior is Jesus Christ.
But when the Pharisees saw him miraculously curing the sick, lame and blind, even resurrecting the dead,
they did not rejoice over that and glorify God for what he was performing through Christ.
The Pharisees were faithless and they refused to believe in and listen to God's Son.
Instead, they persecuted Jesus to disciples because they did put faith in the Christ.
So Jesus exposed the Pharisees for what they were and called them serpents,
because of the deadly spiritual harm that they inflicted on others who were influenced by them.
In fact, the Pharisees exerted such great influence over the people that prominent persons were afraid to confess openly their faith in Jesus
for fear of being expelled from their positions in the synagogue and losing faith in the community.
Can the same sort of fear hold people back today from serving Jehovah as a disciple of God's Son,
fearing the rejection or ridicule they might have to endure from neighbors, friends or family?
If it is, how can you imitate Jesus' disciples?
They not only knew about God, but they trusted in Him as their reliable father and friend.
As proof of that, they went right onto the temple grounds in Jerusalem in full view of everyone and gave a bold witness about God's Son.
They were powerful by their faith.
When the Jewish High Court, many members of which were Pharisees heard about this, they were furious.
They ordered the disciples to stop teaching about Jesus.
What did they do? Coward and fear? No.
We can read what happened at Acts 5, verse 29.
That's Acts 5, verse 29.
It reports,
In answer, Peter and the other apostles said,
we must obey God as ruler rather than men.
Jesus' disciples did not allow the religious leaders' pressure and threats to deter them.
They knew their priorities and the situations would arise when a Christian cannot obey both men and Jehovah God.
You see, human rulers forfeit their right to our obedience when they demand what Almighty God prohibits,
or, as in this case, when they prohibit what God requires of us.
Even if they ban our preaching work, we cannot stop carrying out our God-given assignment to preach the good news.
So, at that very moment,
the apostles set a precedent for all true Christians throughout the ages to obey God as ruler first.
The disciples' faith made them real friends of Jehovah.
And as a result, today they are alive and well in heaven with Jesus to serve with Him as kings and priests.
And what of those faithless Pharisees and their coveted prominence?
Jesus told them to their face what fate lay ahead of them.
As recorded at Matthew, chapter 23, verse 33,
Matthew 23, verse 33,
He told them, serpents, offspring of vipers, how will you flee from the judgment of Gohanna?
Now, the judgment of Gohanna meant that if they did not change, they would be everlastingly destroyed.
If we are going to imitate the disciples' faith, we must do as Jesus urged as followers.
See what He said at Matthew, chapter 6, and verse 33,
keep on then seeking first the kingdom and His righteousness, and all these other things will be added to you.
So, Jesus' disciples must always make the kingdom their first concern in life.
If we do that, then as Jesus promised, Jehovah will see to it that we have the material and spiritual necessities of life.
Now, seeking the kingdom first in our life includes preaching the good news of the kingdom to as many people as we can.
As with Jesus' disciples, it requires courage and boldness to preach when neighbors, friends, or family opposes.
But we do not need to fear them or any other religious enemies, because Jesus taught His disciples how to preach boldly but discreetly.
You can see this at Matthew, chapter 10, and verse 16, Matthew 10, 16.
He said, look, I am sending you out a sheep among wolves, so prove yourselves cautious as serpents, and yet innocent as does.
It seems that most literal snakes would rather flee than attack, so to be cautious here means to be prudent, sensible, shrewd.
Now, the dove is known as the sheep of the bird world, because of its gentle appearance and disposition.
So, to be innocent means being blameless, genuine, with pure motives.
Jesus' point was that when his sheep-like disciples face persecution, they need to combine the characteristics of being cautious and innocent to avoid possible dangers as they carry out their preaching work.
For example, suppose colleagues at work, schoolmates, or even members of your own family make caustic remarks about your beliefs as a witness of Jehovah.
Instead of responding in kind by being equally sarcastic about their faith, show them that their comments have no effect on your peace and your pleasant demeanor.
That's being prudent and blameless, cautious, yet innocent.
We all need to keep imitating the faith of Jesus' disciples.
Well, what have we learned from this symposium?
Two things. First, we must reject the course of faithless ones, like Cain, Lamek, Noah's neighbors, Pharaoh, and the Pharisees.
Second, we need to imitate Jehovah's Faithful Servants, like Abel, Enek, Noah, Moses, and Jesus' disciples.
If we do, then we can enjoy living forever as a friend of Jehovah.
Thank you, brothers. We are determined to imitate the good examples you discussed, especially when our faith is tested.
We now come to the final talk of today's program.
Why do we regularly need to examine our lives and our worship? In what ways should we do so?
Brother Jeffrey Jackson of the governing body will direct us to the Bible's answer.
His theme is, keep testing whether you are in the faith. How?
Do you own a car or a motorbike or some other type of vehicle?
If you do, you realize that it brings with it a serious responsibility.
Initially, it costs quite a bit of money to buy a vehicle, but also you need to keep on spending money to keep it running.
In addition to that, there is another serious responsibility that comes with owning a vehicle.
And that is the responsibility to maintain it safely, so that it doesn't break down, doesn't cause accidents, and most importantly, doesn't cause loss of life.
Of course, if you have a maintenance program, you're not just going to wait for something to fall off the vehicle, or perhaps for it just to stop, but rather ahead of time, you have to have a checklist to see that everything is working properly.
Well, in a similar way, spiritually speaking, each one of us needs a maintenance program with regard to our spirituality.
What sort of maintenance program are we talking about?
Well, let's take our Bibles, please, and turn to the second book of Corinthians, chapter 13 and verse 5.
Second Corinthians, chapter 13 and verse 5.
There it says, keep testing whether you are in the faith.
Keep proving what you yourselves are, or do you not recognize that Jesus Christ is in union with you, unless you are disapproved.
So notice right in the beginning of that verse, it says, keep testing, keep proving.
What does that really mean?
Well, if you look at the study note associated with verse 5, it tells us this.
One lexicon states that the word Paul here uses for testing means to endeavour to discover the nature or character of something.
They could discover the nature of their own spiritual standing by comparing their daily conduct, attitudes and decisions with the sacred truths they were taught.
Doing such testing would help them to keep proving that they were true Christians.
For proving, Paul uses a word that could refer to testing whether something is genuine as one might test metals.
Do we see the point of what this verse tells us?
As Christians, we need to keep testing continually that we are in the faith.
But now, what does this word faith mean in this context?
It's not just referring to the quality of faith, but rather, it involves all the Christian teachings that we find in God's Word, the Bible.
So having that in mind, keep testing, keep proving, really means that we need to look at ourselves and see if we're really living up to what the Bible tells us to do.
Now, that's a very serious maintenance program.
But just as we do a maintenance program for a vehicle and we might have a checklist, is there a checklist that we can use when we're testing and proving that we're in the faith?
Yes, there is. We can say there are three things.
First of all, we need to ask heart-searching questions about our relationship with Jehovah.
That's the first point. Ask the questions that will search through our heart.
Secondly, we have to answer honestly.
Yes, whatever we see is an answer to those questions, then we need to have a correct answer.
And then finally, we need to seek Jehovah's help in making whatever adjustments we need to make so that we can maintain a spirituality strong and in good standing so that our relationship with Jehovah is good.
So with that in mind, let's go back to the illustration we started with, a vehicle, a car or a motorbike.
If you were to compare our Christian faith or our belief, our conduct to a vehicle and the need to maintain it, what sort of things would you make as a comparison?
Well, perhaps the first thing we might think about is the engine.
You certainly need to make sure the engine works correctly because that's what gives the vehicle the power to keep moving.
So it's good for us to ask the question, what is it that moves us or motivates us so that we serve Jehovah acceptably?
Well, the answer is found in the scriptures, and if we turn together to the first book of Timothy, chapter 4 and verse 8.
That's first Timothy, chapter 4 and verse 8.
See if you can discern what it is that we could liken to the engine in a car.
It tells us, for physical training is beneficial for a little, but godly devotion is beneficial for all things as it holds promise of the life now and the life that is to come.
Did you see what the scripture tells us is so important?
Godly devotion.
But we need to understand what godly devotion is.
In fact, we also need to appreciate this beautiful expression in the New World translation.
Many other Bibles just simply translate this as godliness.
Godliness is beneficial or perhaps they say godly training or being religious or even one version says mental training.
But the New World translation captures the meaning of the original word here because you can train or program a robot to do a certain job.
But you can't program it to have godly devotion. Why not?
Because godly devotion involves how we feel about your hover.
It means our loyalty to him based on a heart full of love and appreciation.
So when it says godly devotion is important, it really involves why we do things, not just what we do.
Well, let's think back to our illustration of the vehicle and you want to test the engine.
What would you do to check the engine to see if it's okay?
Well, one thing you might do is keep an eye on the temperature gauge because if the engine is overheating, you know there's a problem.
Or perhaps you might check the oil to see if there's enough oil.
Or you may check to see if you've changed the oil regularly enough.
Or when the engine is idling, you might listen carefully to it to see if it's running smoothly or roughly.
And of course you'd be interested if there's any strange sounds or noises.
So that's the type of thing you would have on a checklist when you're trying to see if an engine is working properly.
Now, none of that applies to godly devotion, does it?
But what could be on our checklist for us to test godly devotion to see if it's healthy and strong or not?
Well, again, the Bible helps us.
If you turn with me this time to the book of Psalms, let's look at Psalm 40 and verse 8.
Here it tells us, to do your will, oh my God, is my delight.
And your law is deep within me.
Now, this is a test of our godly devotion.
How so?
Well, we need to ask ourselves, is my service to god something that I really delight in or is it simply a chore?
Is it something that I do as a mere routine, something that I just keep on doing regularly,
but don't really have a strong desire to accomplish it?
Well, if we were thinking that our godly devotion was not so good, not so strong, perhaps we were just doing things out of routine,
rather than for our love for Jehovah, we need to take action.
Just the same as if we heard that the engine had a knocking sound or if we saw that it was overheating.
And that's exactly what Jesus told the brothers back in the first century in the congregation in Ephesus.
Please turn with me to the book of Revelation 2.
And you'll remember in this section of the book of Revelation as a series of messages that Jesus gives different congregations.
Now, the first congregation mentioned is in Ephesus.
If you look at chapter 2 of Revelation, and if we glance through verses 2 and 3, what do you notice?
Well, Jesus says to the brothers, I know your deeds and your labor and endurance, that sounds good, doesn't it?
Then he goes on to say that they didn't tolerate bad men.
And then in verse 3, he mentions that they persevered, that they had not grown weary.
So what do we assume from these two verses?
That our brothers back then in the first century, in the congregation in Ephesus, were busy doing the work of Jehovah.
Yes, they were active, they weren't giving up.
But then what does Jesus say in verse 4?
Nevertheless, I hold this against you, that you have left the love you had at first.
Do we see the point?
Clearly, it shows us that Jehovah and Jesus are not just interested in what we do, but also why we do it.
Yes, they want us to serve our God, Jehovah, in a way that shows that we love Him and that we're loyal to Him.
Just the same as Jesus loves His Father and is loyal to Him.
And this is so important.
The Apostle Paul highlighted this, if you turn with me, please do 1 Corinthians chapter 13.
1 Corinthians chapter 13, and notice what Paul says under inspiration in verse 3.
And if I give all my belongings to feed others, and if I hand over my body so that I may boast,
but I do not have love, I do not benefit at all.
Now, if we look across at this study note on this verse,
notice that it says, speaking hypothetically, Paul says that,
even instead of love, such pride were his motive,
he would give everything he owned to feed others,
or would even die a martyr's death as a witness to the truth,
but he would not benefit at all.
Isn't that food for thought?
So thinking about this expression, godly devotion,
it's interesting that one Bible scholar defined the original word this way.
He said, it is a very practical awareness of God in every aspect of life.
So if we were to check our godly devotion,
and we see that perhaps it's not really working as well as it should,
maybe it needs maintenance.
What sort of maintenance would we give it?
Well, surely we would need to think of Jehovah more often every day to see him as part of our life,
also meditating on what Jehovah has done for us builds up appreciation and love for him,
and that motivates us to do what Jehovah wants us to do out of love.
Yes, our heart full of appreciation.
And of course, offering prayers regularly to Jehovah helps to strengthen that relationship.
So what have we learned so far in our discussion?
Well, just like the engine of a vehicle needs to be maintained,
we need to be aware of whether or not it's operating correctly.
In a similar way, we need to ask ourselves honest questions,
questions that search our hearts with regard to our godly devotion.
Is our service to Jehovah based simply on routine and a sense of duty?
Do we view it just as a chore?
Or does our heart show that it's filled with appreciation and love for Jehovah?
Well, if we build up that appreciation, that love,
we can be sure that our godly devotion is good.
Yes, it's well maintained.
So that's the first point of comparison that we'd like to make in the maintenance schedule for a vehicle
and for our spirituality.
So let's think of another comparison.
Another very important part of any vehicle are the brakes.
Now, when we think of the brakes, they're absolutely necessary, aren't they?
Because someone could jump in front of your vehicle.
There could be someone who perhaps is coming too quickly
and you have to avoid them and you need to use those brakes.
So what do you think we could compare the brakes to with regard to our service to Jehovah and our relationship with Him?
Well, the Bible gives us a clue.
As we read Psalm 111, we'll see the answer to that question.
So as we turn there to Psalm 111, let's see what verse 10 tells us.
The fear of Jehovah is the beginning of wisdom.
All those observing His orders show good insight.
His praise endures forever.
So do you see what could be likened to the brakes of a vehicle?
What is it that stops us from doing something that displeases Jehovah?
It's our fear of Jehovah.
So just as you need to maintain the brakes in a vehicle,
we also need to make sure that our love for Jehovah and our fear of Jehovah is strong and well maintained.
Now of course we need to think what do we mean by fear of Jehovah?
Do we mean shaking all the time worried that He's going to do something wrong to us?
No.
Perhaps we could liken it to a chef who has a razor sharp knife.
Now this knife, when used properly, can help him to attain all sorts of wonderful things.
But if he misuses it, then he has a problem.
So in a similar way, if our relationship is strong with Jehovah,
there's no need for us to be shaking in our boots as it were.
But rather, we need to remember always that Jehovah is with us.
And so a healthy fear of Jehovah means that we don't want to displease Him in any way.
So a fear of Jehovah helps us so that as we're moving along,
if anything comes our way, we're ready to stop if we shouldn't engage in that activity.
So let's think for a few moments about the maintenance check for the brakes.
What would you do? How would you check if the brakes are okay or not?
Well, mechanics tell us that if you're applying pressure to the brakes
and you find the steering wheel is starting to shake,
that's a sign that maybe they need attention.
Or if you apply pressure to the brakes,
and the vehicle starts to veer off to one side, again, not a good sign.
Or as you press the brake pedal,
if you find there's very little resistance and you have to start pumping it,
again, that's a problem.
And of course, like with the engine, if you start to hear strange grinding noises,
that is never a good sign isn't.
Well, what about our fear of Jehovah?
How can we test whether or not our fear of Jehovah is at the right level?
Well, we know that Satan and his world constantly throw things at us,
temptations, wrong thinking, and so on.
So it's just like you're driving in a vehicle and someone jumps out in front of you
on animal runs across the road, that's when we need those brakes.
But how do we apply them?
How does our godly fear help us?
Well, let's turn to the book of 2 Corinthians
and see a very interesting point that is mentioned to the brothers back there in Corinth.
So 2 Corinthians chapter 10,
and we're going to look at verse 5.
Now, the context of this chapter is where Paul is talking about wrong teachings.
But the principle, as outlined in this verse, can be applied also to our reaction to wrong thoughts
and immoral thoughts, or all sorts of things that are not in harmony with Jehovah's will.
So let's see if we can see what the principle is.
2 Corinthians chapter 10 and verse 5.
For we are overturning reasonings and every lofty thing raised up against the knowledge of God.
And we are bringing every thought into captivity to make it obedient to the Christ.
So do we see the point?
No matter what sort of thought it is,
if it's an immoral thought,
a temptation to do something wrong,
something that's not neutral with regard to the political situation,
what does it say here?
We have to react quickly.
It's just as if we put on the brakes.
Yes, we have to overturn all these sort of things that could be going on in our mind.
So obviously it's important for us to test our Godly fear in the sense of thinking,
how do I normally react?
If I'm faced with a situation that perhaps tempts me, am I quick to react?
Do the brakes work properly or is my Godly fear compromised?
An interesting question.
Also another illustration.
Just imagine that in your car,
you find a whole lot of poisonous spiders.
Well, that's not good, isn't it?
Of course, you get someone to help you get rid of those spiders.
Now, after you've paid that person to do the job,
how would you feel if they said, well, we got most of them.
It could be one or two left.
I don't think you'd be very happy, would you?
Because you won all of those poisonous spiders out of the car.
But what does it tell us here in verse 5?
It says, we have to get all the things that are out of harmony with Jehovah under control.
Yes, we could find that even though most of the things
are under control, there could be just a few areas where we haven't got them under control.
It could even be that as if we're going in the wrong direction.
Well, what do you need to do if you find out you're driving on the highway in the wrong direction?
Stop, turn around and go the opposite direction.
So isn't that exactly what we should do when it comes to this matter of checking our Godly fear?
Yes, if we see that in any way we're a little slow in reacting
when immoral temptations come our way or other wrong thinking,
then we need to strengthen our fear for Jehovah.
Yes, our fear of Jehovah helps us to resist these things.
Now, what's something that can help to strengthen our fear of Jehovah?
Well, again, the Bible gives us an indication.
This time we find it in the book of Proverbs.
Proverbs chapter 8 and verse 13.
And you'll notice this is a little definition or formula for us.
The fear of Jehovah means the hating of bad.
So what is it that can help us strengthen our fear of Jehovah?
We need to hate what is bad.
Now for a moment, let me ask you this question.
Is there some type of food that you really hate?
I know I can think of a couple of things that I just, I really can't eat, and I hate them.
If someone tries to tempt you to eat that food,
are you going to give in easily? Of course not, because you hate that type of food.
Well, how much more important it is for us to develop within ourselves a hatred for what is bad?
Yes, we have to make sure that when we see things that Jehovah hates,
that we feel the same way, that we don't accept them.
Never would we allow gradualism to change our feelings with regard to what Jehovah says is wrong.
Now as we read on, looking back at Proverbs chapter 8 verse 13,
notice it says, the fear of Jehovah means the hating of bad.
Then it says, I hate self-exaltation and pride,
and the evil way and perverse speech.
So we need to make sure that we take out of our hearts any sort of pride
that could interfere with our relationship with Jehovah.
That's very important, and that's part of hating what Jehovah hates.
Just think for a moment, as we're doing this checklist
to see how our fear of Jehovah is, is it strong or weak?
We need to think about what things do I really feel proud about?
Is there something that deep inside you you feel?
Yes, I feel really proud about this.
We'll never forget David's son, Absalom.
He was proud about his hair, but in the end it was his hair that goes into the problem
and he ended up dying because of his hair being caught in the branches.
So never would we want to be like Absalom
and allow the thing that we are proud of to actually cause us a serious problem.
So that's been interesting, hasn't it?
Looking at a second comparison between the maintenance of a car
and the maintenance of our Godly fear.
Just like the brakes, Godly fear can help us to stop before we do something
that would displace Jehovah.
Now of course, when we're thinking of this matter of comparing the maintenance of a vehicle
with the maintenance of our spirituality,
there are so many different comparisons that we could make.
And your mind's probably already going there thinking of,
well, will we make this comparison or that one?
But we only have time for one more comparison.
And you probably won't think of the one that we're going to talk about.
That is the horn.
You see, in some parts of the world, drivers say the horn is just as important as the brakes.
Why?
Because they need to let people know they're driving along the road.
It could be someone is beside them and they're about to change lanes and crash into them.
Well, the horn can help.
Or it could be someone is distracted and they're crossing the road.
Again, the horn will help.
So a horn used correctly can save lives.
So what do you think we're going to compare the horn to with regard to our spiritual activities?
Well, if we read 1 Timothy together,
1 Timothy chapter 4 and verse 16,
we'll see what the comparison is.
1 Timothy chapter 4 and verse 16.
Pay constant attention to yourself and to your teaching.
Persevere in these things.
For by doing this, you will save both yourself and those who listen to you.
So we could say that just as a horn is important with regard to a vehicle,
likewise, our sounding out the message of the good news,
out teaching others, and telling them about the nearness of your harvest day
can result in lives being saved.
But now, if you were to check a horn,
what would you be looking for or pass more importantly listening to?
Well, for a start, you'd try to test the horn and honk it.
Now, if the no sound comes out, you know you have a problem.
Or on the other hand, if the sound is too soft that nobody can hear it,
that likewise is a problem.
So what about us?
Do we need to think about how our proclamation of the good news is?
Yes.
Let's take not just the normal activities we're involved with without preaching work,
but what about informal witnessing?
Do you see the opportunity?
Do you think, yes, I need to talk to this person and nothing happens.
The horns are working in a symbolic sense.
Or perhaps we do have the opportunity and we take it,
but the message is not clear.
So persons don't really understand what we're saying.
So if either of those were the case,
we'd need to see that maintenance is required with regard to this symbolic horn.
What would we do?
Well, it could involve praying to Jehovah for courage,
here's boldness to be able to witness to others,
whether it's informally telephone witnessing or other forms of witnessing.
And then if we're not so clear or coherent with regard to how we present the message,
how important it is for us to practice ahead of time,
to have special sessions where we practice what we'll say,
and then this way we can be ready to give a clear message to those who listen.
Well, that's been a very interesting exercise, hasn't it?
What did we see?
If we're using this comparison, this illustration of a vehicle,
we could say that the engine of a vehicle is like our godly devotion.
Our devotion of Jehovah needs to come from our hearts.
And the brakes of a vehicle we could liken to our fear of Jehovah.
Yes, if we hate what is bad the same as Jehovah does,
it will stop us just like brakes do.
And then finally we discuss this matter of having a horn that sounds the message properly.
Yes, we need to make sure that we ask Jehovah's help to maintain our witnessing
in such a way that we can clearly help others to hear the message.
So as we've gone through this, I'm sure, as we've already mentioned,
you can think of many other comparisons.
But the point is, a wise driver does not just drive his car or motorbike
or whatever vehicle it is.
A wise driver also checks to make sure that the vehicle is safe to use.
So likewise, for us as 2 Corinthians 13 verse 5 says,
we need to keep testing.
Yes, we need to keep proving that we are in the faith.
In other words, keep checking that we really are Christians,
that we are really living up to what we believe and what we teach others to do.
But remember, what is it that can be a problem for us?
Well, again, if we turn to the book of Corinthians this time,
1 Corinthians chapter 10 and verse 12,
we'll see what the problem can be.
That's 1 Corinthians chapter 10 and verse 12.
Let the one who thinks he is standing, but we're that he does not follow.
Yes, just thinking everything is okay.
There's no problems thinking that we're just going on fine without testing ourselves
and proving that we're in the truth, that can be a problem.
Just like lack of maintenance to a vehicle can result in not only damage
with regard to the vehicle, but also loss of life.
How important than it is that we continue to keep testing
whether or not we are in the faith or in the truth.
So if we do these tests regularly, and we check to see,
how is our godly devotion going, how is our fear of Jehovah,
our hatred for what is bad, how is our sounding out of the message going?
If we see some weaknesses, what do we need to do?
Well, our final scripture takes us back to our theme scripture.
Remember that was 2 Corinthians chapter 13.
And verse 5 is where it says keep testing, keep proving that you yourselves,
what you yourselves are.
But then if we look down a little further to verse 11,
we'll notice what it tells us that we need to do if we see some problems.
In verse 11, it tells us finally brothers continue to rejoice to be re-adjusted.
Now what does this mean to be re-adjusted?
Well, if you look up at verse 9, you see the same expression is used there at the end of verse 9.
And the study note to that verse tells us this.
It says the word is used to describe the restoring of something to a proper condition.
For instance, at Matthew 421, the word is used to describe mending nets.
So nets that are damaged or have holes in them, mending them is just like re-adjusting them.
Agulation 6.1, the same verb is used of the need to re-adjust spiritually,
a fellow believer who has taken a false step.
The term is sometimes used in medical text to describe the setting of a barn, a limb or a joint.
So what's the point?
If we do this checklist, go through it, and we see that somehow our godly devotion is not as strong as it should be.
We're just doing things out of routine, but our love for Jehovah is no longer strong.
Or if we find that our fear of Jehovah is not stopping us from doing what is wrong.
Or if we're finding that we just are not thoroughly bearing witness to the good news.
Then we need to take action.
What does it involve? Well, as it says here, first of all, identifying what the problem is,
then re-adjusting, repairing, and in some places, replacing activities.
So brothers and sisters, let's always remember, no matter how long we've been in the truth,
no matter what privileges we have, we need to keep looking at that checklist.
Yes, we need to keep testing and proving that we are in the faith.
Thank you, brother Jackson, for helping us to examine our motives and strengthen our relationship with Jehovah.
Today, we have discussed what genuine faith is, and we have considered evidence that provides a basis for faith.
What can we look forward to on the next segment of the program?
The scripture theme will be, put up a hard fight for the faith.
We'll learn how to put our faith into action, and how to resist things that could weaken our faith.
We'll see examples of brothers and sisters around the earth who are putting up a hard fight for the faith.
Our closing song is number 119. Entitled, we must have faith.
Let's sing song number 119, and after the song, you may have your own closing prayer.